Dear young people, yesterday’s Gospel
passage was the one where Jesus
speaks about communion, comparing that
unity to the vine and its branches.
Today, in the Gospel, the Lord
calls us to remain in his love.
We all know very well that, by
definition, God is love, don’t we?
Are you sure?
I can’t hear you.
So, we all know that, by definition,
God is love — but when we look at
the world and everything that’s
happening in it, do we care more that
God is love, or that God is just?
Even though we know that in the
Gospel it says—by definition—that
God is love, in practice we so often
put more emphasis on God as the
just one than on God who is love.
It’s almost as if, deep down, we’re
more inclined to long for a God who
is “fair”, who will now set wars
right, who will stop this, stop that.
I get that same feeling even now, when
we look at the political situation.
Some people even get angry with the
Pope for proclaiming the Gospel of
peace, the Gospel of love, rather
than some “just” God or some kind
of religion. And that’s hard for us.
Understand, because whenever we find
ourselves in a situation, we’d like God to
be just first, and only then to be love.
And we often long for that.
Is our God really almighty?
How just is he, and how almighty?
What can He do?
What can God do?
What is His strength and power?
And how much can He do?
So, some will say, God can do anything.
God can only do what is love.
Because we need to understand this
evening what I’m talking about,
and what the fundamental difference
is between an almighty God who can
love, and a love that is almighty.
You understand the fundamental difference.
A God who is almighty, who can love.
That’s the kind of God
some people long for.
And then we have God who is
love, and whose love is almighty.
And that’s why we say that God can do, and
with his power, everything that is love.
As the Gospel says, God is love.
And we honour, love, and
cherish the God who is love.
And where do we see this
power and this love which is…
infinite, which gives itself?
It’s there when Jesus says in
John’s Gospel, chapter 15: that no
one has greater love than the one
who lays down his life for others.
There Jesus calls us friends as well.
And there Jesus shows us what God is like.
Is he the all-powerful God,
or is he the God of love?
Because if Jesus says that there is
no greater love than to lay down one’s
life, then Jesus did exactly that.
And now remember the moment in the
Garden of Gethsemane, where Jesus
goes through his agony, and where
the soldiers came to take him away,
knowing the end was drawing near.
Jesus himself even mentions there that
he could call on a legion of angels.
Jesus really could have done that.
To avoid the horror of crucifixion,
he could have called on a legion of
angels, and God would surely have
sent a legion of angels to set him
free, to protect him and defend him.
But then what kind of God would that be?
If, in some situation, Jesus
had done that, he would have
shown us an all-powerful God,
but not a God who is love.
As it is, Jesus persists in staying,
and shows us the image of a God
who is love — not merely just, but
the one who loves to the very end.
Because we know that Jesus set
himself free out of love—he
gave himself to the very end.
You see how much we need
to understand that freedom.
And this is what even Christians
find hard to accept and grasp: that
the responsibility is entirely ours.
We freely choose every gesture of love.
Because it isn’t love if it’s
forced, if it’s out of necessity,
if it’s talked into, if it’s
provoked—it has to be pure freedom.
And you see, Jesus here didn’t make use of
his power, his omnipotence, but of love.
And he shows us an image
of God who is love.
And remember that other paragraph
I absolutely love in the Book of
Revelation, where it describes our
God, how wonderful he is, who is love.
It says: “I stand at the door and
knock; if anyone opens to me…”
Here again God shows a love that
respects the freedom of you and me.
Because God doesn’t force His
way through the door, because
love doesn’t break things down.
If love were violent, if it prised
open someone’s heart by force,
then it wouldn’t be love anymore.
And God, who is love, says He
stands at the door of our heart.
He knocks.
He waits.
For us to open to Him.
And you know that lovely parable—about
that painting by the artist who
captured that very moment of God
knocking at the door—because the door
had no handle on His side to open it.
Which means the handle – the possibility
of opening our heart – is on our side.
People often say, “God is far
away. God can’t be experienced.
God is this, God is that.” No.
Don’t go looking for
him somewhere far off.
The saints say that too.
God is here.
It’s just that we’re the ones who
so often get tangled up and don’t
know how to open our heart to him.
And that’s what God wants.
That’s why today it says: God is love.
And imagine this: Jesus says — I don’t
know whether that sentence encourages you
— but listen, Jesus says to the disciples:
“As the Father has loved me, so I have
loved you.” Nothing less, nothing more.
The same.
Just as he is loved by the
Father, so Jesus loves us.
It’s just that sometimes we have this
feeling — but I’ll talk about that later
— about how to open ourselves to that love.
I think all of us who are here
want to experience God who is love.
And many Christians do
too – everyone who would, right?
But simply, many people struggle
to open themselves up to that
love and let it into their lives.
You know, people talk a lot about
that love in every context these days,
but I like how Pope Francis once,
at the Casa Santa Marta, explained
a criterion for how to recognise
whether a love is truly real love.
Is a love truly of God?
He gave two criteria.
First, he said that if something is
genuinely God’s love, if it’s real,
true love of God in us, then love has to
be proved more by deeds than by words.
We all know that well.
Love is proved more by
deeds than by words.
So you can tell me whatever
you like, but show me love.
God didn’t stop at just talking, at
writing the Bible two thousand years ago.
He showed it with his life on the cross.
OK, and he said, “I am love,” and
you can see me, you can see what
I do — deeds. He loved in a real,
concrete way, he loved to the very end.
So it didn’t all remain just words.
And God shows his love — whereas
we sometimes feel the need to
talk about how we love, but we
don’t show it through our actions.
God immediately showed through
what He did that He loves us.
I think all of us, at some point in
life, find ourselves in a situation where
we’re disappointed—maybe by friends,
maybe by family—by a kind of love
that stays only at the level of words,
without any real action to back it up.
You know, we’re all brought up
in our families differently,
coming from different places.
And you know there are lots
of different love languages.
And then you’ve got, I don’t know,
we’re typical Bosnians: it’s just
taken for granted that we love each
other—God forbid we actually hug.
But if someone needs help, the whole
family jumps in, we all rush to sort
the situation out straight away.
But for someone to give you a calm,
gentle hug or something like that—no, no.
That’s just how we were brought up.
I was in Italy, and I’ve got that
sort of experience from Italy.
In one part of Italy, love is very
affectionate again: there’s constant
hugging, constant cuddling, constant
encouragement, constant flattering with
words, but then perhaps in a concrete
situation, when you actually need help,
it’s withheld from you in a different way.
That’s why I say there are many
love languages, but Pope Francis
mentions those two criteria.
Love is proved by deeds,
not by words—by words.
And secondly, he says that
love comes from the fact that
communication is truly part of love.
Because love communicates.
That is, God loved and communicated.
He communicated through his deeds,
he communicated through his words.
Communication is, I say,
an integral part of love.
If there is no communication, for
example we Christians can go on about
how Christian we are, how good we
are, how devoted we are to God, and
yet we don’t communicate with our
fellow man, with a work colleague,
with a friend, with a spouse.
Do you understand?
We don’t communicate with the person.
And then love isn’t concrete,
it can’t be lived out.
True love of God is shown in
deeds, as the Pope says, and that
love, in itself, communicates.
It’s true that Christian
love, real love of God, isn’t
always the way we imagine it.
For each of us, God’s love
can also be something that
happens as a love that hurts.
That’s what Jesus showed.
So, we as Christians can often
expect it, because Jesus prepared
us for it and warned us that we must
go through what He went through.
Because what’s asked of us is that
true, authentic love: that we can
love, that we can forgive those who
don’t love us, those who hate us,
those who may persecute us, who may
trample on us in one way or another.
And that’s why Christian love is
sometimes difficult and painful, yet free.
Because, again, you do
everything in freedom.
Each of us, in such situations,
chooses either love or hatred.
Until a person recognises within
themselves why they should forgive
someone, or love them, or hate
them—until they themselves understand
what they’re doing to themselves by
that—Jesus didn’t say for no reason
that we should forgive and love,
because in that way love is multiplied.
Because if my heart isn’t free, if you’re
not clean of hatred and of other feelings
towards someone, then you can’t say that
your love is what we said a moment ago:
proven by deeds, and that it communicates.
That’s why Christian love
can sometimes be hard.
It’s hard if we stay on the
surface, on the merely human level.
But for us that grace, like the
grace Jesus had, comes from God.
From God.
So the Lord gives us the grace of the
Holy Spirit and the strength to be
able to love even our greatest enemies.
And if nothing else, I’m sure that
even if we don’t yet have that heroic
act of loving our enemies so much and
forgiving, we’ve been given the grace at
least to protect ourselves from hatred.
To protect ourselves.
Because sometimes it seems strange
to me that people choose to hate.
Because I always… I say: if
you won’t forgive someone else,
you haven’t punished them.
You’ve punished yourself.
Because every time you stay stuck
in something, in some open wound,
in some unresolved relationship, you
haven’t harmed that other person.
You haven’t harmed God either.
You’ve harmed yourself.
That’s why it’s important always to
keep in mind that God, through this
commandment… because very few people can
say, “How can your God be love?”, and
yet today’s Gospel we’re reading says:
Jesus says, “I give you a commandment.”
How is it that if God is love and
freedom, He gives us a commandment?
It sounds interesting, but God is
emphasising what matters—what is
so good for us that we should hold
to it as if it were a commandment,
so we don’t lose our way.
Because today it’s easy to get lost
in relationships with other people, in
emotions—some of us are more emotional,
some less, some… But a person can
quickly lose themselves in all of that.
Especially when you get battered from
all sides, knocked about, dragged
through it, wounded—then you end
up like a lost soul in the fog.
You don’t know where you’re going,
you’ve just turned up, set off…
what am I doing, why am I living?
And you’ll see all of that—especially
you young people—where you get
discouraged from fighting, from
hoping, from moving forwards.
It’s strange to me that young people
don’t have dreams, don’t have desires.
And where?
Where did you lose it?
Well, here you are – it
got lost in all of this.
When certain life situations have been
slapping you about, wounding you, and
you haven’t managed to surface from it.
You haven’t managed to rise
above it and sort out all those
things, to protect yourself.
And then you’re still floating in it – in
that situation, in that relationship.
Look, some of you split up with a
girlfriend or a boyfriend and you can’t
get out of those wounds for years, and
it’s just drama, drama, drama, drama.
I know it hurts, but,
mate, love isn’t violent.
If someone doesn’t want you, accept it.
If someone wants to leave you,
have a bit of self-respect too.
If someone rejects your love, then
thanks, bye mate, there are others.
Right?
So, love can sometimes
make you laugh as well.
But look, what’s also important,
as a third point: we say God is
love—and He is love—but sometimes
we need to see whether our love is
in order, pure, towards ourselves.
You know there are those kinds
of disordered love — especially
disordered love towards ourselves.
Because I think it’s fundamental for
a good relationship with God, and
fundamental for a good relationship
with someone else — whether it’s
friendship, whether it’s married couples
or anything else — to have a good,
healthy attitude and love for yourself.
But that’s where things
can become disordered.
And that most often
goes in two directions.
You’ve got that… disordered,
self-important kind of self-love.
Everything has to submit to me.
Everything revolves around me.
So if it isn’t the way I want it,
the way I expect it, then again there
are problems, again there’s drama.
That’s one of the disordered
attitudes of “love” someone
can develop towards themselves.
You know those people who are always
right, and always the ones in need,
everything has to revolve around
them — and if it doesn’t, that’s where
all relationships come to a halt.
If you won’t play by his rules, or hers,
that’s where relationships break down.
And that’s when we can see that
something isn’t quite right.
Because we become a bit self-important
towards ourselves, and maybe put ourselves
on a level we’re not really up to.
But then there’s the other extreme,
which is perhaps an even harder one when
it comes to experiencing God’s love:
in some people, it’s self-contempt.
So you’re constantly self-loathing:
blaming yourself, hating things about
yourself, not accepting yourself,
criticising yourself, being dissatisfied,
and there’s this continual contempt
for your own attitudes and decisions.
Those people are the hardest to help.
And look, if someone has nothing but
contempt for themselves, it’s hard
to bring them closer to God, who is
love, because they’re always doubting.
If you despise yourself, you always
think you haven’t deserved love.
How often do we hear it when people
say, “Oh, I don’t deserve it, I’m
not worthy to be forgiven. Does God
love me, after what I’ve done?” But
listen, my dear: there’s nothing you
can do that would make God move away
from you. There’s nothing you can do
that would make God stop loving you.
Even if you’re the greatest sinner, even
if you’ve made the worst decisions in
your life, God does not turn away from us.
Look, it’s interesting: it
says the devil knows us so well
and he knows our names too.
And there’s that saying that
the devil doesn’t call us by our
name, he calls us by our sin.
But you see, with God it’s different.
God says there in Holy Scripture, he
calls out, “Jacob”, “Israel” — meaning,
he calls by name: “I have called
you by your name; you are mine.”
So, you see, God calls us by
our name, not by our sins.
Because He loves us,
because we are His children.
And Satan, who also knows our
names, calls us by our sins.
And you can see what the difference is.
The difference is this as well:
God wants us to burn for Him, and
the devil wants us to burn out.
That’s it.
And that’s why I say we have to keep
working at it somehow, and begin
first of all, right from the start.
On having a good, healthy relationship,
and the way we live towards ourselves.
Then it will develop differently with
God too, and with our neighbours.
Today that image of God is very distorted.
You know, you often hear it — for
example, brother, what I said: how
Satan calls us by our sins, not by our
name, and how he keeps convincing us
that we’re not worthy of God’s love.
And Jesus says today, “Remain in
my love, and I in you.” That means:
don’t go anywhere else, don’t look for
comfort elsewhere, don’t look for hope
elsewhere — I’m here, stay with me.
Remain in me.
It’s interesting, if you remember that
scene when Peter comes before Jesus,
throws himself at his feet and says,
“Lord, go away from me; I’m a sinful
man.” And where does that come from?
Because Satan convinced him that he was
sinful, that he wasn’t worthy of Jesus.
And the poor man says, “Go away from
me, Lord, I’m not worthy, because I’m
a sinner.” Because Peter believed what
Satan tries to convince all of us of:
that we’re not worthy, and that when
we’re sinful we should live apart from
God. But the reality is different. God
calls us precisely then: “Come, let
me cleanse you; come, let me heal you,
let me strengthen you, let me love
you, let me carry you on my shoulders.”
However, when Jesus emphasises this
– “remain in my love” – how is it that
all of a sudden we’re seeing such an
exodus from the Church? How is it that,
even though we know all these wonderful
things about God’s love, so many people
are leaving the Church, not going to
church at all – everything has gone cold?
And then you sometimes hear
suggestions: people say the Church
should change something, the
Church should do something new.
Maybe the Church ought to modernise a bit.
Of course it should use everything
that’s good for proclaiming the Gospel.
But God, by definition, is love.
He doesn’t need PR.
Because you know who uses PR—these days
it’s fashionable in every company—to
advertise something, to sell something,
to persuade people of something,
regardless of whether it’s good or not.
Rather, my job is to persuade
you to buy this, or to take it.
It’s the same as what’s being pushed
today in the Church as well: “Come
on, get a move on, do something, shake
things up a bit, hire experts.” But God
doesn’t need that. God doesn’t need it.
Because what happens?
That kind of PR for the Church, PR
for God, has produced bad fruit in
some parts of the Church – across
our continent, across Europe – where
we see churches shutting down.
And why?
Because they went to listen to
the experts, and then they dealt
with it like this: the truth gets
adjusted so that it’s acceptable.
God is truth.
The truth can’t be adapted to
society just to make it acceptable.
So, that’s wrong.
That’s where it goes off.
It means Jesus’ messages get changed.
And then you see how both the direction
and the proclamation can go wrong if we
start promoting and pushing what we think.
But we don’t need to change the content
of faith, or the Gospel, or God.
God is love.
Nothing can be better than that.
What needs to change is us.
We need to change ourselves.
So if God is love, I must
pray: “Lord, keep me in you.”
To remain in my love.
I won’t do anything to you.
I can only make you happy, content.
But it’s the person who won’t let
themselves be loved, who rejects love,
and that needs to be stated clearly.
That has nothing to do with our
preaching, with adapting, with the way
we’ll present the Gospel today; it’s
that a person doesn’t want to change.
It says very clearly in the
Gospel: I came, but people
loved darkness more than light.
That’s what Jesus says: they
loved darkness more; they
loved lies more than the truth.
And that’s why I’m saying people leave
for that reason — not because the
Church isn’t modern, not because it
hasn’t changed the way it proclaims
the message, but because, at heart, a
person doesn’t want to change themselves.
Because they love darkness more.
People say things even though they’re not
at all like how they describe themselves.
But when you’re standing in prayer
before God, ask: “God, what am I really
like?” You know, I’ve noticed that myself
too sometimes when I come before God.
There are those moments when you truly
just fall apart, you break down before
Jesus — especially when you begin to grasp
that sense, that realisation, that God is
love, that He loves you just as you are.
And in a person there’s simply born
that feeling of repentance, and a
desire to draw even closer to God.
But when someone is full of themselves,
when they don’t allow God to love
them, there’s no joy in that.
You can force it, sure.
Look, yesterday I was preaching in
Dubrava, I was leading a spiritual
renewal, and I used that comparison:
the vine and its branches.
What a brilliant comparison that is.
But the Lord wants us
to bear fruit every day.
I was explaining that yesterday too;
perhaps someone was at the retreat
and has heard me for the second time.
My dear people, most of us in
the Church are living off the
old glory of our spirituality.
That is, we fall back on ten years ago
when I encountered God — oh, how I was on
fire then, how I really felt something.
Oh, how I could pray ten years
ago – ten years ago I was able to
pray, and now I can’t pray at all.
But we still keep going to church.
We stopped long ago praying
fervently, loving fervently,
sacrificing fervently, fighting.
We’re still in the church, we still go
on Sundays, but this world has somehow
sucked us in so much – problems,
worries, everything – that all of a
sudden we’ve drifted away from God.
Because Jesus says: he looks for fruit.
God doesn’t ask what you gave ten years
ago, but what the fruits of love are today
— what has grown today in your heart.
Can anyone make use of some fruit of
love from my heart, from your heart,
today, among the people we’ve met?
Was there any fruit today?
Or was it only evil?
Because we must — Jesus asks for it.
I heard that yesterday in the
Gospel: he says every day.
And he even says, if it doesn’t bear
fruit — chop — off with its head.
So, fruit is being asked of us;
we’re meant to bear it every day,
to wake up a bit and not live off
the old glory of our spirituality.
That’s what I’m saying in those moments.
If we’ve been given something,
the Lord has given it to us, and
it has to be lived out every day.
We should fight each day to bear
fruit, not reel off to God things
from 10, 15, 20 years ago: “Back
then I was at my best,” and now I
just carry on going to church, but I…
It’s sad to see a Christian
who’s dry, who’s withered.
Imagine that young shoot — that’s
you and me — wilting every
day and not bearing any fruit.
And there are… loads of Christians who are
spiritually, spiritually cut off from God.
Cut off.
Yes, they’re present in church.
Yes, they’re declared Christians.
Yes, they’re the ones who welcome
the priest at Christmas, for
the blessing of their homes.
But, realistically, both the world and
God will recognise us by our fruits.
We can present ourselves to one another
however we like — as good, as holy, as
sinful — and have all sorts of opinions.
But the fruits are there.
The fruits.
When a Christian today is missing those
basic fruits — even just a little spirit
of joy, a spirit of prayer — it drives
me mad when someone says they can’t pray.
Well, you can’t if your faith is weak.
You should let the Holy
Spirit pray within you.
Then you’ll see it is possible.
But if you won’t let the Holy
Spirit in, of course every
prayer feels like a burden.
Because you’re forcing it yourself.
You need to let yourself go a bit, let
the Spirit’s fervour carry you, let
God’s love sweep you up, so you just
can’t stop thanking God for the whole
day that’s been so wonderful today,
despite the crosses, the problems.
No, honestly, we can’t even pray.
So I say: the spirit of joy.
Then what are we going to stir
up in ourselves, and in others?
The spirit of perseverance,
and so on and so on.
We can, I’m saying, speak to
one another, but we need it.
Yes.
We prepare ourselves and
we examine the spirits.
People, pray.
Pray for mercy and for the gift of
the Holy Spirit—for whatever you need.
Whether it’s the gift of prayer,
of love, I don’t know — whatever
you need, God will give it to us.
Because God wants us to remain
in Him and to bear fruit.
Amen.